update retrieval section with Lassie (#1812)
filecoin-project/filecoin-docs: content/en/basics/how-retrieval-works/basic-retrieval/index.md

## Lassie

> Lassie is a simple retrieval client for Filecoin. It finds and fetches your data over the best retrieval protocols available. Lassie makes Filecoin retrieval easy. While Lassie is powerful, the core functionality is expressed in a single CLI command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lassie is a simple retrieval client for Filecoin and IPFS. It finds and fetches your data over the best retrieval protocols available. Lassie makes Filecoin retrieval easy. While Lassie is powerful, the core functionality is expressed in a single CLI command:
```

```shell
lassie fetch <CID>
```

> Lassie can also be used as a reference library to fetch data from Filecoin. In the absence of a single uber-protocol which meet all data transfer needs, Lassie was designed to use multiple protocols for data transfers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lassie can also be used as a library to fetch data from Filecoin from within your application. Due to the diversity of data transport protocols in the IPFS ecosystem Lassie is able to use multiple protocols, depending on how the requested data can be fetched.
```

![Lassie Architecture](lassie_architecture.png)

> ### Lassie HTTP daemon

Reviewer: Let's not lead with this, it's not really the primary mode we want to encourage—in fact there's a good chance it'll be spun out into a separate tool. I wouldn't mind if this section is trimmed down some more too, maybe with a link into the Lassie repo for more info.

For the audience, the primary mode they'll want is the CLI. In #1833 I did a bunch of work on that mode which could be pulled in. In that PR I ignored the daemon because I don't think it's going to be as helpful for the majority of this audience.

Author: Yes. Plan is to redo this section to reduce the info here. I will link it to Lassie repo.

> The Lassie HTTP Daemon is an HTTP interface for retrieving IPLD data from IPFS and Filecoin peers. It fetches content over the GraphSync and Bitswap protocols and provides the resulting data in CAR format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Lassie HTTP daemon is an HTTP interface for retrieving IPLD data from IPFS and Filecoin peers. It fetches content from peers known to have it, and provides the resulting data in CAR format.
```

```shell
GET /ipfs/{cid}[/path][?params]
```

Retrieves from peers that have the content identified by the given root CID, streaming the DAG in the response in [CAR (v1)](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format.

> #### Request

Reviewer: Same as my comment on the CAR format section, there's too much detail here, it's going to change a lot over time as we develop further, and the daemon is not a standard usage mode we imagine a lot of people using. They can be pointed directly to https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/HTTP_SPEC.md for all this info. A summary if anything would do I think.

##### Headers

- `Accept-Ranges` - Returns with `none` if the block order in the CAR stream is not deterministic

- `Cache-Control` - Returns with `public, max-age=29030400, immutable`

- `Content-Disposition` - Returns as an attachment, using the given `filename` query parameter if provided, or if no `filename` query parameter is provided, uses the requested CID with a `.car` extension.

  Example: `bafy...foo.car`

- `Content-Type` - Returns with `application/vnd.ipld.car; version=1`

- `Etag` - Returns with the requested CID with the format as a suffix.

  Example: `bafy...foo.car`

- `X-Content-Type-Options` - Returns with `nosniff` to indicate that the `Content-Type` should be followed and not to be changed. This is a security feature, ensures that non-executable binary response types are not used in `<script>` and `<style>` HTML tags.

- `X-Ipfs-Path` - Returns the original, requested content path before any path resolution and traversal is performed.

  Example:  `/ipfs/bafy...foo`

- `X-Trace-ID` - Returns the given `X-Request-Id` header value if provided, otherwise returns an ID that uniquely identifies the retrieval request.

> ### Lassie Car files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Lassie's CAR format
```

If we can avoid "CAR **file**" that would be good, it's a "transport" that often ends up as a file, but shouldn't be conceived only as a file. As per #1833, you don't even need to treat it as a file to use it. I know it's hard to avoid "file" in many cases though.

Reviewer: I think also this section is too much, they could just be pointed to https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md for the gory details. From the user perspective they get a CAR, they can unpack files from that or pass it on to somewhere else. A lot of the details here are useful if you're building on top of lassie, but I imagine most readers of these docs just want to run a CLI to fetch and unpack the content they stored.

A "shallow" (e.g. when using `depthType=shallow` with the (HTTP)[HTTP_SPEC.md] server) traversal will include the entire UnixFS entity if the content is found to be UnixFS data. i.e. if the terminus is a sharded UnixFS file, or a sharded UnixFS directory, the blocks required to reconsititute the entire file, or directory will be included. If the termination is a UnixFS sharded directory, only the full directory will be included, not the full DAG of the directory's contents.

A "full" (e.g. when using `depthType=full` with the (HTTP)[HTTP_SPEC.md] server) traversal will include the entire DAG from the termination of a `path`, or from the root CID where no `path` is provided.

Under certain conditions, a complete DAG may not be returned.

* When a Filecoin storage provider chosen to retrieve from does not have the full DAG, only the portion that they do have will be included.
* When a Bitswap session is unable to exhaustively discover all blocks in a DAG, only the portion that was discovered will be included.

### Retrieve using Lassie

Make sure that you have [Go](https://go.dev/) installed and that your `GOPATH` is set up. By default, your `GOPATH` will be set to `~/go`.

> ### Install Lassie

Reviewer: From here down, content from #1833 might be a decent drop-in replacement that you could iterate from.

## Lassie

Lassie is a simple retrieval client for IPFS and Filecoin. It finds and fetches your data over the best retrieval protocols available. Lassie makes Filecoin retrieval easy. While Lassie is powerful, the core functionality is expressed in a single CLI command:

```shell
lassie fetch <CID>
```

> Lassie fetches content in content-addressed archive (CAR) form, so in most cases you will need additional tooling to deal with CAR files.

Reviewer 2: a bit of an odd statement right after "Lassie makes Filecoin retrieval easy"... oy maybe we need to just add car extraction directly.

> Lassie can also be used as a library to fetch data from Filecoin from within your application. Due to the diversity of data transport protocols in the IPFS ecosystem Lassie is able to use the Graphsync or Bitswap protocols, depending on how to the requested data is available to be fetched. One of the most prominent use case of Lassie library is **Saturn Network** nodes fetching the content from Filecoin and IPFS to serve the retrievals. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lassie can also be used as a library to fetch data from Filecoin from within your application. Due to the diversity of data transport protocols in the IPFS ecosystem Lassie is able to use the Graphsync or Bitswap protocols, depending on how to the requested data is available to be fetched. One of the most prominent use cases of Lassie as a library is the **Saturn Network**. Saturn nodes fetch content from Filecoin and IPFS through Lassie in order to serve retrievals. 
```

    ...
    ```

2. Download the [go-car binary from the latest release](https://github.com/ipld/go-car/releases/latest) based on your system architecture

>    or install the [go-car](https://github.com/ipld/go-car) package using the Go package manager:

Author: These are intentional so both lines are separate in rendering. Makes easier to identify that user can take one of the two approaches.

    ...
    ```

   The go-car package makes it easier to work with content-addressed archive (CAR) files.

You now have everything you need to retrieve a file with Lassie and extract the contents with `go-car`.

#### Retrieve

To retrieve data from Filecoin using Lassie, all you need is the CID of the content you want to download.

> Below video demonstrate how Lassie can be used to render content directly from Filecoin/IPFS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The video below demonstrates how Lassie can be used to render content directly from Filecoin/IPFS.
```

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/h_zCd7ssKCQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Lassie and go-car can work together to retrieve and extract data from Filecoin, all you need is the CID of the content to download.

```shell
lassie fetch -o - <CID> | car extract
```

> This command uses a `|` to chain two commands together, this will work on Linux or a macOS. Windows users may need to use PowerShell to use this form. Alternatively, you can use the commands separately as explained later in this page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command uses a `|` to chain two commands together. This will work on Linux or macOS. Windows users may need to use PowerShell to use this form. Alternatively, you can use the commands separately as explained later in this page.
```

    ...
    ```

* `-o` is an optional flag that tells Lassie where to write the output to. If you don't specify a file, it will append `.car` to your CID and use that as the output file name.

  If you specify `-`, as in our above example, the output will be written to stdout so it can be piped to another command, such as go-car, or redirected to a file.

> * `<CID>/path/to/content` is the CID of the content you want to retrieve, and an optional path to a specific file within that content.

Reviewer 2: would be nice to include an example of using this -- wikipedia is a good test -- @rvagg probably has some URLs he has tested with.

Reviewer: Yeah, `bafybeiaysi4s6lnjev27ln5icwm6tueaw2vdykrtjkwiphwekaywqhcjze/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function` (or pick your favourite page, perhaps `bafybeiaysi4s6lnjev27ln5icwm6tueaw2vdykrtjkwiphwekaywqhcjze/wiki/Lassie`).

`lassie fetch -o - bafybeiaysi4s6lnjev27ln5icwm6tueaw2vdykrtjkwiphwekaywqhcjze/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function | car extract - | less` is supposed to work but is failing me at the moment and I don't know why, but if it works for you then feel free to include it.

Reviewer: https://github.com/ipld/go-car/pull/409 fixes the problem of `car extract -` when you have an incomplete DAG (i.e. you have a specific path and just want to extract whatever it finds in there) coming from stdin. I'll cut a release as soon as that commit is approved and merged so just proceed here with the docs as if it works.

`go install github.com/ipld/go-car/cmd/car@2670bb87e2dc306b74dc5ca66ad763d24ad742a5` if you want to try it for yourself on that branch.

Author: It works for me with `go-car` commit. I am adding it to docs.

  A CID is always necessary and if you don't specify a path, Lassie will attempt to download the entire content. If you specify a path, Lassie will only download that specific file, or if it is a directory, the entire directory and its contents.

##### go-car CLI usage

> The `car extract` command can be used to extract files and directories from a CAR:

Reviewer 2: perhaps note about where to download and install go-car?

Author: This is already there at https://github.com/filecoin-project/filecoin-docs/pull/1812/files#diff-392c257e64c55c339f84cd9e5759891b48359815e5fd0fbf55bbefeb6c025e19R53 This is a subsection and we are already installing binaries in the beginning of this section.

A CID is always necessary and, if you don't specify a path, Lassie will attempt to download the entire content. If you specify a path, Lassie will only download that specific file or, if it is a directory, the entire directory and its contents.

##### go-car CLI usage

The `car extract` command can be used to extract files and directories from a CAR:

```shell
car extract -f <INPUT_FILE>[/path/to/file/or/directory] [<OUTPUT_DIR>]
```

* `-f` is an optional flag that tells `go-car` where to read the input from. If omitted, it will read from `stdin`, as in our example above where we piped `lassie fetch -o -` output to `car extract`.

* `/path/to/file/or/directory` is an optional path to a specific file or directory within the CAR. If omitted, it will attempt to extract the entire CAR.

* `<OUTPUT_DIR>` is an optional argument that tells `go-car` where to write the output to. If omitted, it will write to the current directory.

If you supply `-`, as in the above example, it will attempt to extract the content directly to `stdout`. This will only work if we are extracting a single file.

>   In the example above, the `>` operator was used to redirect the output of `car extract` to a named file,. This is because the content we fetched was raw file data that did not have a name encoded. In this case, if we didn't use `-` and `> filename`, `go-car` would write to a file named `unknown`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In the example above where we fetched a file named `lidar-data.tar`, the `>` operator was used to redirect the output of `car extract` to a named file,. This is because the content we fetched was raw file data that did not have a name encoded. In this case, if we didn't use `-` and `> filename`, `go-car` would write to a file named `unknown`. In this instance `go-car` was used to reconstitute the file from the raw blocks contained within Lassie's CAR output.
```

Take or leave that second part, my main concern was "example above" because we have >1 of them above. But my point with the second bit is to try and address the confusion that will inevitably arise from "why isn't Lassie just spitting out my file?", it's quite confusing for people when a single file isn't a single block, or when it is a single block, why that block isn't just the file itself. You have to "reconstitute" / "reify" the file back from raw IPLD form and in the case of a large .tar file, that's a _lot_ of blocks to piece back together.

`go-car` has some other useful commands, such as `car ls` which can be used to list the contents of a CAR, and `car inspect` which can be used to inspect the contents of the CAR, and optionally verify the integrity of a CAR.

And there we have it! Downloading and managing data from Filecoin is super simple when you use Lassie and Go-car!

### Lassie HTTP daemon

The Lassie HTTP daemon is an HTTP interface for retrieving IPLD data from IPFS and Filecoin peers. It fetches content from peers known to have it, and provides the resulting data in CAR format.

```shell
GET /ipfs/{cid}[/path][?params]
```

`GET` query against a Lassie HTTP daemon allows retrieval from peers that have the content identified by the given root CID, streaming the DAG in the response in [CAR (v1)](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format.
You can read more about the HTTP request and response to the daemon in [Lassie's HTTP spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/HTTP_SPEC.md).
Lassie's HTTP interface can be a very powerful tool for web applications which require fetching data from Filecoin and IPFS. 

### Lassie's CAR format

> Under normal operation, Lassie only returns IPLD data in CAR format. Specifically, the [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for varying the data included.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Under normal operation, Lassie only returns IPLD data in CAR format; specifically, [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for varying the data included.
```

> Under normal operation, Lassie only returns IPLD data in CAR format. Specifically, the [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for varying the data included.

Author: I have changed that line to be more clear.

> Under normal operation, Lassie only returns IPLD data in CAR format; specifically, [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for manipulating the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lassie only returns data in CAR format; specifically, [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for manipulating the output.
```

> Under normal operation, Lassie only returns IPLD data in CAR format; specifically, [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for varying the data included.

Author: ```suggestion
Under normal operation, Lassie only returns IPLD data in CAR format; specifically, [CARv1](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/) format. [Lassie's car spec](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/blob/main/docs/CAR.md) describes the nature of the CAR data returned by Lassie and the various options available to the client for manipulating the output.
```

    -rw-rw-r-- 1 user user 143M Feb 16 11:36 moon-data.tar.gz
    ```

4. You can then manage the data as you need.

And there we have it! Downloading and managing data from Filecoin is super simple when you use Lassie and Go-car!

### Lassie CLI/API

Lassie’s API and CLI currently consist of a single command: `fetch`. Fetch takes a CID and outputs a CAR file. Eventually, we’d like the Lassie CLI and HTTP API to support the following features:

1. Direct Provider Fetch

    ```
    lassie fetch CID --providers ....
    ```

> 2. Bitswap only retrieval
> 
>     ```
>     lassie fetch CID --disable-graphsync
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Bitswap only retrieval

    ```
    lassie fetch CID --disable-graphsync
    ```
```

Let's ditch this, it's advanced usage and as of a few days ago this option has been removed and replaced with a `--protocols` argument. I'm not sure that's useful for the audience though—mostly they just want to fetch their content however they can. `--providers` is even advanced but maybe not unreasonable if they know a specific SP they want to fetch from.
